Can society be considered as a self-organizing (‘autopoietic’)
system? If so, what are the implications of this approach for
sociological theory? If social systems can be considered as causes of
change, this perspective contradicts a central assumption in most
modern sociology, namely that social change has to be explained in
terms of, or at least with reference to, human agency. In modern
times, we no longer assume that gods and demigods control our
history.

Notions of systems which organize the social process autonomously
have been around in social theory, particularly on the marxist side,
but these theories were suspect because of their lack of analytical
rigor, and consequently of sophistication in empirical design. Ever
since Weber, sociologists have attempted to explain social structure
and change on the basis of a theory of action (cf., Giddens, 1979;
Münch, 1982/1988). The idea of a supra-individual social system
which actively exerts control may therefore seem to many
sociologists an invitation to obscurantism.

The problem of supra-individual control reappeared on the agenda
of empirical sociology from the study of socially organized
cognitive activities like the sciences (e.g., Knorr-Cetina and
Cicourel, 1981). Kuhn (1962) proposed understanding the
development of the sciences in terms of paradigms. He described
paradigms as historically emerging from crises in communication.

Upon its establishment a paradigm begins to organize a science both
in terms of relevant communications and cognitions, and in terms of
underlying communities. Actually, the paradigm seems to trigger a
process of co-evolution involving the cognitive science system, the
relevant discourse, and the community. Increasingly, scientists
working within a specialty have to give way to the further
development of the paradigm, at the price of losing their tickets.
Eventually, paradigms may fall back into crisis and disintegrate
when they lose the competition with alternative paradigms at the
supra-individual level.

The concept of paradigms provided the sociology of science—and
other fields (cf., Prigogine and Stengers, 1979/1984; Dosi, 1982;
Luhmann, 1990a)—with a heuristic model for understanding self-
organizing systems at the supra-individual level. But how can supra-
individual structure control social action? How can such a theory be
given sociological meaning? Is it possible to specify the conditions
for a supra-individual system to behave in this ‘self-organizing’
way?
